"A Painful Situation" (Editor’s Note, June 27-July 3) states that "the cold fact is that medical inflation in SA last year was 11% — far ahead of SA’s inflation rate of 4.5%, as well as people’s salary increases". Apart from the fact that no source is provided for this "cold fact", a number of questions arise. For example, what is meant by "medical inflation"? What basket of goods and services is used to calculate this specific inflation rate? And how and by whom are the data collected? It is commonly assumed that "medical inflation" is higher than "normal", "general" or "nonmedical" inflation, but I have yet to find compelling empirical evidence from SA to substantiate this assumption. By this I am not excluding the possibility that "medical inflation" may be higher, but all the empirical or other evidence I have been confronted with (for example, in medical negligence cases) has been flawed in one way or another. A common error is to confuse levels and rates of change: that medical services are expensive does not imply that their prices are increasing more rapidly than prices in general. That is why one should avoid statements like "there’s little chance that medical costs will drop below inflation". The general "thumb-suck" notion or assumption that "medical inflation" is higher than headline inflation may have serious implications — for example, in all cases where compensation for future medical expenses has to be determined. Future expenses have to be discounted and, if a lower discount rate is used for medical expenses than for other expenses (because "medical inflation" is higher than headline inflation), the current value of the relevant compensation (for example, in medical negligence or road accident cases) increases significantly. The eventual costs to the provinces, the Road Accident Fund and other similar funds may potentially run into billions of rands. One can only hope that awards in such cases are not based on the "cold facts" such as those referred to above. Philip MohrEmeritus professor of economics, Somerset West • The editor responds: The figure of 11% annualised medical inflation was taken from Discovery’s medical inflation index for 2019, reflecting the growth in medical aid claims over a decade. The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za