Most South Africans want a country with an equal society that is educated, employed, law-abiding and prosperous. Not the Zimbabwe or Venezuela that Justice Malala predicts (At Home and Abroad, August 8-14) if President Cyril Ramaphosa loses. May I suggest a few obvious steps that Ramaphosa could take to turn things around: • Appoint Mark Barnes to the vacant post of Eskom CEO — he is without a job and has the experience and people skills gained while turning around the SA Post Office; • Rescind the decision to separate Postbank from the post office — it is only being done to further the ends of corruption — and fire those responsible; • Fix the other state-owned enterprises (SOEs) — SAA, Denel, Transnet and the SABC — by rolling out a plan for incremental privatisation over the next three years using Telkom and the post office as examples. They are the only SOEs that have been successfully turned around. Why? Because of the appointment of competent managers, without government interference; • Identify the most bankrupt municipalities and appoint competent managers as turnaround agents; • Capitalise on the momentum of the recent deluge of court cases the public protector has lost (5-0) and have parliament investigate her fitness to hold office. Then suspend her; • Reinforce the National Prosecuting Authority so it is able to do its job — the first items on its list being the prosecution of Ace Magashule, Jacob Zuma, the Guptas, Markus Jooste and the EFF leaders involved in the VBS Mutual Bank matter; • Bin National Health Insurance for the obvious disaster it will be — just another avenue for looting and corruption. And where would the money come from? The taxpayer is already overburdened; and • Call on the support of all the opposition parties — except the EFF, who are populist opportunists who want a situation like that in Venezuela — and forge alliances to get things done. Ramaphosa should forget the political rhetoric and simply do it. He’ll find the majority of South Africans will applaud him. And if he succeeds, he’ll give the people of SA their country back. Paul McNaughtonStellenbosch The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za