On June 20, the FM published an article titled "Satisfaction Deferred: Frustrated shareholders remain in limbo after JCI’s auditor declines to sign off its annual financial statements" (Fox, June 20-26). The following is an edited response to the article by JCI’s attorneys. The full version can be found online at fm.co.za. We address this letter to you at the instance of our client, JCI Ltd. We are instructed that the article largely constitutes sensationalism, the writer having relied on the unproven statements of unidentified shareholders and failed to have regard to readily available records concerning the financial status of JCI and its financial statements, let alone to contact JCI for comment. Certain of the allegations or innuendos, which are without any foundation, are also defamatory of the directors of JCI. We want to address two principal issues: the allegations concerning the purported insolvency of JCI; and its failure to produce audited financial statements. Had the matter been investigated and JCI contacted, it would have been immediately apparent that the article does not portray a true picture of JCI. The writer should have been aware that consolidated annual financial statements, prepared on the Specific Basis of Preparation, of JCI were published for the 2005, 2006 and 2007 financial years in respect of which KPMG then advised the board it was unable to express an audit opinion. Furthermore, financial statements were produced for each of the 2008-2016 financial years, which were audited by KPMG. Those financial statements were approved by an overwhelming majority of JCI shareholders, without objection from any of the shareholders — let alone the unidentified purported shareholders upon which the article seeks to place miscast assurance. Those financial statements, together with communications to shareholders, have always made clear the basis upon which the statements have been prepared. In addition, the Companies & Intellectual Property Commission application and counter-application, which has been brought by JCI, also make clear why International Financial Reporting Standards have not hitherto been adopted: specifically, the difficulties experienced by the current board (appointed after the Brett Kebble era) and the reason that the Specific Basis of Preparation remains the only possible basis for the preparation of the accounts. Accordingly, shareholders have not "been left in the dark" as you have incorrectly left readers to believe. What is more, we are instructed that a cursory consideration of the financial statements would have made it clear to the writer of the article that JCI is by no means insolvent, contrary to the picture painted. TWB — Tugendhaft Wapnick Banchetti & PartnersOn behalf of JCI’s directors, including Peter Gray The editor replies: The FM stands by its story The FM welcomes concise letters from readers. They can be sent to fmmail@fm.co.za