If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? We all know that it’s not a sound investment strategy to have a single investment. Setting that logic aside, I would propose Alphabet, Google’s holding company. The Google solutions, products and services permeate most facets of our lives. As they continue to innovate and develop, this would be my pick for long-term capital appreciation and global wealth creation. Which talent would you most like to have? Being able to read minds would be wonderful. It would really make life (business and personal) a whole lot more interesting and rewarding. What was your first job? I was 12 when I had my first paying Saturday morning job. I ran front of house for my dad’s dry-cleaning business. I was responsible for receipting items for cleaning and dispatching orders for collection. This was a formative experience in my ability to engage with people as an adult. Do you own bitcoin or any other cryptocurrencies? Why? No. I see blockchain technology’s value and future, but I can’t justify the investment case for a cryptocurrency where it does not meet the criterion of a currency as a store of value. If you could fix one thing in SA today, what would it be? I would focus on the culture and, more importantly, the habit of saving. Putting aside 10%-20% of every rand we earn and investing these amounts for capital growth would be the cornerstone of economic and social prosperity for SA. What’s the best investment you have ever made? There are a few. The one that stands out is adding Sasol to my share portfolio in 1995 when it was trading around R30. It’s one of the shares that I have continued to hold which has proved that a long-term passive investment strategy does yield return. Today it trades around R420. And the worst? Steinhoff. I speculated on the stock during December 2017 when the share price just started to fall. I had convinced myself that a blue-chip share of that pedigree would bounce back once the "noise" had settled. We all know how that ended. What’s your favourite song? Ho Hey by The Lumineers. It evokes happy memories of family holidays. If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won $100m, what would you do with it? I would first scout the area for the candid camera crew. Once in the clear and before cashing it in and making decisions, I would take time to process and reflect on the concept of the windfall. Money is a means, not an end. To live a life of true happiness with that kind of wealth, I would need some serious soul-searching to bring purpose and meaning to my life. What travel experience is on your bucket list? Cruising the Baltic Sea and experiencing the rich history, natural beauty and architecture of Scandinavia and Russia is top of my list. On what occasion do you lie? I’m definitely overoptimistic with my time. When I’m late, I’ll generally say that I’m almost there. What is your most treasured possession? My wedding band. It’s a daily symbol and reminder of what’s important to me: my wife and children. How much was your first pay cheque and what did you do with it? It was actually a cheque payment — R1,360 for vacation work at an auditing firm in 1993. I made a photocopy of the cheque before banking it. I think most of that money went towards paying my clothing account for my new corporate work outfits.