The convoy of shiny black , shiny German vehicles came in and cruised through the rubbish- and sewage-strewn streets of Alexandra township. With blue lights and sirens blazing, they the vehicles filled up both sides of the narrow road, relegating other drivers to the verges. embankment. They slowly made their way up to the stadium where thousands of people were waiting to hear the president speak. President Cyril Ramaphosa, in his capacity as ANC leader, had come to address residents about solutions to their lack of service delivery issues: inadequate housing, piles of uncollected rubbish, piling up, and sewage flowing down the streets and sometimes running into their shacks. Just days before Days earlier, the township’s residents had embarked on a "total shutdown", closing all roads leading in and out of Alexandra with burning tyres and rocks. Ever the politician, and with the May 8 elections looming ever closer larger, Ramaphosa told the crowd of potential voters those gathered that over the next five years the government would build a 1-million houses and distribute tablets to over the next five years. School-children pupils would get tablets over the same period. The very next day in parliament, public works minister Thulas Nxesi revealed that said the government would spend R750m more than R730m on property renovations to state buildings and the homes of for cabinet members, a report in the Sunday Times said. To be clear, that’s R750m to be spent on renovating minister’s homes and other government buildings. And that was just the spending for Just this year. Details are important, so Herewith the more telling details enlightening bits of the whopping budget (readers with high blood pressure, beware): . You are cautioned dear reader: you will be pissed off by the end of it. Among the items on which the cash will be spent is R1m to upgrade a kitchen and a bathroom in one minister’s house in Rondebosch, Cape Town; Another minister will get a R29m guardhouse, plus an electric fence and security cameras worth R4.3m for another minister; and R5.7m will be dropped for new carpets for the Union Buildings. in Pretoria. This is despite the National Treasury urging government departments to tighten their belts and reign in nonessential spending. A reminder that The politicians who will benefit from the spending these are the same ones politicians who that claim to represent the poor of Alexandra and countless other townships throughout SA where residents, Maokeng, Phomolong in Kroonstad and Gugulethu and Imizamo Yethu in Cape Town — who are made to people live without basic municipal services. What is clear is that these communities, many of which are being rocked by a new wave of (not for the first time) by service delivery protests, and many other similar ones throughout the country, will likely be left waiting yet again for their long-promised relief. services, yet again. The politicians, however, even during an election year, have shown no appetite for restraint. With the right-hand side of their mouths they promise service delivery to the poor, and with the left-hand side try to justify the expenditure of public money monies on themselves. Terms like "splurge" and "profligacy" frills" come to mind when you think of this kind of spending — which in the current environment, or any environment, really, are is wholly irrespossible irresponsible and reckless. The South African SA economy is barely growing. Tax revenue generated has consistently failed to meet targets and is lagging fast-expanding . Public public debt. has been growing faster than tax revenue. Critical infrastructure, At the Passenger Rail Agency of SA, (Prasa), at Eskom, at municipalities and other agencies, critical infrastructure has not been maintained, mainly due to lack of funds. These are entities that are supposed to serve the poor. Still, the government’s spending spree on itself splashing out continues. At what point does President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration stop to ponder whether its their financial extravagance frivolity only serves to encourage is in fact an impetus for materialism among debt-ridden SA consumers trying to keep "Keeping up with the Joneses? Jones." Senior members of the government are supposed to be leading by example. But cars with price tags of more than R1m, Million-rand cars, lavish trips and luxury home improvements (paid for with taxpayer money) says one thing: we don’t give a damn about you, we’re only in it for ourselves.