An imminent new month means fresh ways to spend your downtime. Here are the FM’s picks: Horse around Champers between chukkas, stomping a divot or two, making like you’re the immaculately attired owner of some vast manor — what’s not to like about a day at the polo? To try it out, take note — the Veuve Clicquot Masters Cape Town Polo takes place from 2pm this Saturday, March 2, at Val de Vie Estate in the Paarl-Franschhoek valley. There are various ticket options available, from a real VIP option (R4,300) to straightforward access to the picnic area (R380). The former gets you loads of Veuve, a special lounge, a butler, prime views of the field and even security, among other fancy delights. vcmasterspolo.co.za Relive a day again and again Imagine existing in a perpetual loop of the same day. And that day happens to be your birthday. Pretty suffocating, disorientating and surreal, right? Such is the premise of the latest Netflix comedy-drama Russian Doll. The brilliant Natasha Lyonne (you’ll recognise her from hit show Orange is the New Black) stars as Nadia Vulvokov who keeps coming to, after dying multiple times, at her own birthday party. She remembers everything from the "day before" and must piece together the puzzle of why she’s living on repeat. And then, dramatic pause, it turns out, she’s not alone in her groundhog day daze. Take note, this is smart but macabre and weird stuff. Book a table Think of this as planning for the future, because frankly it’s going to be a while before you can secure a booking at Wolfgat, the 20-seat West Coast restaurant. The reason? Its acclaimed and passionate chef Kobus van der Merwe and his Paternoster team just scooped the Restaurant of the Year gong at the World Restaurant Awards. This is the top prize at the new global event, and Wolfgat also won the "off-map destination" section. Over the past few years, Van der Merwe and his brainchild have won local hearts for their sustainable, seasonal tasting menus — created from the region, from the sea (seaweeds included) and from foraging — and now, happily, the international set are taking notice too. wolfgat.co.za