If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? Amazon — this company was built to cater for the world of changing technology. It operates in a number of different sectors and its balance sheet and management have managed to stay one step ahead of everyone else. It is akin to investing in the world’s best technology fund. What’s the wisest thing you could tell your 20-year-old self that you didn’t know when you started out? SA is a small part of the investable universe. Global companies make up the other 99% of world markets. Which talent would you most like to have? To see into the future. SA or offshore? Offshore. If you could fix one thing in SA today, what would it be and how would you start? Right now, SA cricket! For the future, better education for more people is only half the battle. Corporate SA needs the support of government to help grow and invest in our country. GDP growth is key, and all role players are responsible to ensure that growth leads to better job creation. Who do you admire in the investment community, and why? I admire the entrepreneurs who have stepped out of the corporate world to successfully start their own investment businesses. These include Cy Jacobs (36One), Murray Winckler and Gavin Vorwerg (Laurium), Patrice Moyal (Visio), Malungelo Zilimbola (Mazi) and Peter Armitage (Anchor). What’s the worst investment mistake you’ve made? Not cutting losses and, in fact, trying to double up or to catch up when the fundamental thesis has changed. What’s the best investment you’ve ever made? And how much of it was due to luck? Anchor Securities — I had great partners and mentorship from veterans of the business world. How do you control your emotions, when all you want to do is sell or buy a share, but you know you shouldn’t? I stand back from the market, work out the fundamentals and simply stick to a long- term plan. What is your greatest extravagance? Good food shared with family and friends. Big Tech or old-fashioned industrial stalwart? Big Tech. Do you own bitcoin or any other cryptocurrencies? What do you make of Facebook’s tilt? Yes — I bought some of the most expensive ethereum over the past three years. I think Facebook is pioneering the adoption of conduits that will shape the future. Facebook, Twitter or Instagram? Twitter. What was your first job? And can you remember how much you were paid? I was a waiter at the age of 16, I think I made R300 on a good night. How much of a portfolio should be for the wildcard picks? 5%. Art, wine, rare books or cars? Wine. Do you cycle? If I have to. Would you buy or rent your primary home? Buy — I don’t like paying someone else’s debt. If you weren’t a fund manager/analyst, what would your dream job be? Food critic.